Nuts and Bolts
---


## Governance

##### How is the school governed and run?

![Paneling](img/whiteboard.jpg)

The overarching governing body of the school is School Meeting, which is
comprised of all enrolled students and staff. Each member of School Meeting
(each individual student and staff member) is called a School Meeting Member,
or SMM. School Meeting convenes once a week to vote on decisions related to
running the school, such as rule changes, deletions, or additions, spending
proposals from the school budget, visitor approvals, and more. Every SMM has
one vote in every decision that we make (although most voting matters are not
mandatory), regardless of the type or magnitude of the decision - from what
supplies to stock the art room with to which staff we should hire. 

While School Meeting creates and edits the rules and policies of the school as
needed, Judicial Committee (JC) enforces all the rules in our law book. JC
works in a similar way to jury duty; it is a rotating group of students and
staff that serve together on the committee for one week at a time. Serving on
JC is a requirement of all SMM’s, from the 5 year olds to the staff. JC meets
every day to handle cases, or “write ups.” A write up happens when any SMM
(child or adult) believes that another SMM (child or adult) has broken a rule
from the law book. When this happens, the plaintiff retrieves a write up form
and records the details of the incident. The case is usually heard the next
day in JC, which is run much like a small court - all testimony from both
sides is heard, evidence is presented, and JC makes two decisions by vote: was
a rule actually broken, and if it was, what should be done about it? We call
these consequences “sentences,” and the range varies depending on the case and
the rule broken. Some examples of sentences might include a warning, having to
wipe down the lunchroom tables if a mess was left out, being banned from a
room or supply if it was used incorrectly.

There is a third governing body of the school called Assembly, which includes
all School Meeting Members (staff and students) as well as all the parents.
Assembly votes on decisions outside of the day to day running of the school,
such as tuition and staff salary. Assembly meets once a year in the spring to
approve the school budget and take care of any other needed business. 

##### How does graduation work? 

Arts & Ideas, like most Sudbury Schools, offers a diploma process involving a
written thesis and defense process for those students aged 16+ who choose to
undertake it. By November of their graduation year, students intending to
graduate must declare that intent and begin to prepare their thesis to answer
the question, ‘How have I prepared to enter the world beyond school?’
Throughout the year and with the help of an advisory committee, the student
works to prepare a written piece explaining their answer, as well as any other
supplemental materials (be they written, performed, or otherwise documented)
to help support their case. In the springtime, a panel of staff members from
neighboring Sudbury schools convenes to hear the student’s thesis and defense.
The panel then votes to grant or deny a diploma. Whether or not the diploma is
granted, the student may choose to graduate and move on to the next stage in
their life. In the event that they are denied the diploma and are still 18 or
younger, they may continue to attend Arts & Ideas and attempt the diploma
process again in the following year. The diploma process is not mandatory and,
as long as a student is of age to leave school, they need not necessarily
undertake it to graduate. It is an optional process that many, but not all,
teenagers who are leaving the school wish to undertake, often as a capstone of
their experience at the school.

The diploma granted by Arts & Ideas is not a legally recognized high school
diploma, although it is usually quite an impressive document that students can
use for college or job applications. Some students do choose to pursue a GED
while they are enrolled as well, although many do not as they are not usually
required for college admissions or hiring. 

## Admissions

##### How do we enroll?

Learn more about our [enrollment process by clicking
here](how-do-we-enroll.html). 

##### What is tuition?

Learn more about the [financial obligations of enrolling by clicking
here](how-much-does-it-cost.html). 

##### Do you accept students with disabilities?

Arts & Ideas enrolls students with disabilities on a case-by-case basis.
Regardless of any disability, all students need to be able to be independent,
keep themselves safe without constant adult supervision, and handle their own
needs (such as eating and going to the bathroom). While we do not provide any
specific accommodations for students with disabilities (like occupational
therapy or speech services, for example), we have had many students who
required services or medications in previous education settings do just fine
here. In many ways, every student at A&I is on their own IEP (Individualized
Education Plan), in that they have the space, time, and freedom to be
themselves and learn in whatever way makes sense for them. We have had many
students achieve great success at Arts & Ideas that have been diagnosed with
Autism, Dyslexia, ADD, ADHD, Emotional or other Mood disorders, among others. 


## Attendance

##### Year round?

Arts & Ideas operates with a schedule similar to neighboring public schools,
including summer vacation, winter break, and spring break. See our calendar
for more information. 

##### Hours?

The school is open from 8:15 AM - 5:45 PM. To receive credit for a full day of
attendance, students are required to be present for a total of at least 5
hours, and those 5 hours must include the core hours of 11:00 AM - 3:00 PM.
The school offers extended drop-off and pick-up hours from 8:00 AM - 6:00 PM
for an additional fee for those families who consistently require it.


## Resources


##### What resources are available at school?

![Meetings](img/meetings.jpg)

Just like our law book, the resources available at school ebb and flow based
on current student interests. Over the years, we have amassed certain
consistently popular resources. These include our robust Music Room, which
boasts many instruments as well as professional recording equipment and
amplifiers. Our Art Room is well stocked with paints, crayons, pencils,
markers, paper of all kinds, a sewing machine, fabric, hot glue guns, yard and
knitting needles, stickers, stamps, clay...and more! The Video Room is where
students can use professional video equipment to record stop animation shorts
or live action videos. Many students also enjoy editing videos and exploring
the animation process with our access to advanced editing software. Our
commercial kitchen is fully decked out with pizza ovens, industrial fridges
and freezers, a deep fryer, ice machine, and separate dishwashing room. The
library is bursting with books suitable for all types and ages of readers; we
also have a parent library full of books about or related to the Sudbury model
that are free to borrow. Our gym room has a junior kip bar, practice balance
beam, yoga mats, and gymnastics mats to create a safe space for flipping and
tumbling. We have lots of science equipment, including bunsen burners, scales,
and glassware. As the school continues to grow and settle into it’s new home,
we can’t wait to see how our students continue to fill it with all their
ideas! 

##### Field trips?

We love taking field trips at Arts & Ideas. Some trips are primarily planned
and executed by staff, while others are largely coordinated by students. Just
a few field trips we’ve gone on over the years include: taking the light rail
to the Baltimore Aquarium, listening to all kinds of concerts at The Peabody,
seeing plays at The Theatre Project, exploring for treasures and learning more
about the ecosystem at the nearby Herring Run Park, hiking, overnight camping
at the beach in Delaware, and engaging in all kinds of outdoor fun at Camp
Puh’Tok. 

##### Daily activities?

![Fake Guns Allowed](img/gunning.jpg)

As you might imagine, daily activities at Arts & Ideas are widely varied from
student to student, day to day. On any given day at school, you might see
students climbing trees in the yard, eating lunch on the front steps, planning
and cooking for a bake sale at school, playing minecraft in the computer lab,
practicing coding or animation skills on laptops, recording a new song in the
music room, scripting and holding auditions for a play, filming a stop
animation short in the video room, conversing about current events with staff
in the office, walking to the nearby coffee shop for a hot chocolate, chatting
and laughing with friends on a comfy couch in a sunny spot, researching an
interesting topic on the internet, reading, writing stories or preparing a
poem for Poetry Club, creating comic books, building a dollhouse, trying to
fix a broken computer, or building a hamster track out of blocks. Come back
the next day and you’ll probably see a whole new set of activities!



