Our Story
---

![Rocky story](img/rocking.jpg)


Arts & Ideas Sudbury School is a 21st-century school in Baltimore where
students ages 5 through 18 learn, explore, and grow in a stimulating,
supportive community.

The school is based on a philosophy of education first pioneered by the
Sudbury Valley School in 1968 and now operating in more than 40 schools
worldwide. A&I was founded in 2008 by two parents, also professors who,
inspired by the Sudbury model of education, wanted to start a school for their
own children and the Baltimore community. Before starting Arts & Ideas, the
founders were involved with pre-school groups that were focused on what
children naturally do best - play! While observing their own young children
grow and learn, the founders recognized that play - which is how all children
learn to interpret and manage their world - should not stop when a child turns 5.
They wanted a school where play (which we define as any activity with no
known outcome) was not squashed, or limited to a certain amount of time per
day, or only available to the youngest students. Instead, they wanted a school
that celebrated and encouraged play for all students of all ages. After years
of planning and researching, Arts & Ideas opened its doors in 2008 in a small
rented space with just 9 students. 

The school first opened in the upstairs hall of the Church of the Messiah in
the Hamilton/Lauraville neighborhood of Northeast Baltimore. While the space
at the church was lovely - bright, welcoming, and warm - the school quickly
began to outgrow the available square footage there. Another obstacle at the
church was the sharing of space - other groups used some of our rooms, meaning
we had to either keep them relatively empty or clear them out at the end of
each day. Because of these sharing arrangements, and the fact that we were
renters, we could never truly make the space “ours.” 

In the third year of the school, the A&I community started to search for a new
home - a permanent location where the school would have the freedom to mold
and shape the space without limitations. After countless visits to potential
buildings and hours of planning meetings, A&I finally entered into a lease for
a large church building in the Mt. Washington neighborhood of Baltimore. The
school existed in this building for one year (our 6th year), but when it came
time to re-sign the lease after 12 months, the church decided that they wanted
to sell the building instead of continuing to rent it out. While we did have
the option to purchase this building, we decided not to - mainly due to the
fact that it needed immense structural work that would be enormously
expensive. 

So, we said goodbye to Mt. Washington and came back to our original home at
the Church of the Messiah to regroup and plan our next step. Throughout year
7, the A&I community (parents, staff, and students) worked tirelessly to
secure our true "forever home". Finally, in the fall of our 8th year,
Arts & Ideas purchased our very own building!

![Victorious arrival](img/victory-gym.jpg)

Now in our eighth year, Arts & Ideas is a thriving community with over 50
students of all ages working together to create, maintain, and nourish a free
and democratic school culture in our new building! 

We invite you to explore the [model on this
website](start-at-the-beginning.html), read more about the
[details of our school](nuts-and-bolts.html), and [contact
us](contact-us.html).

There's no other school quite like this in Baltimore!

