Our Space
---

![Gym room](img/chaya-mid.jpg)


After years of searching and planning, Arts & Ideas is thrilled to finally be in
our very own building! Our main building is about 12,000 square feet spaced
over 4 floors, including a lovely historic staircase and a modern elevator. In
the basement, we have a rec room with lockers and sports equipment, as well as
a woodworking shop chock-full of tools ready to tackle any project. Upstairs
on the first floor, there’s a lovely library/quiet/study space with plenty of
comfy arm chairs, and a industrial, restaurant grade kitchen complete with all
the basics along with some fun extras like pizza ovens and deep fryers. The
office also lives on the first floor, where kids are welcome to hang out
throughout the day. Upstairs, you’ll find students playing games like
Minecraft or practicing coding skills in our computer lab, rehearsing advanced
gymnastics techniques in our gym room complete with floor mats and a bar,
flexing their creativity by making extraordinary projects in the art room, or
recording stop animation movies or youtube videos in the video recording
studio. There’s also plenty of versatile hang out spaces that are perfect for
impromptu board games, science experiments, or simply hanging out with good
friends. All our instruments, including guitars, a drumset, and piano, as well
as advanced music recording equipment are housed in the neighboring carriage
house, another building on the property that’s about 900 square feet. We love
having the music room in a separate building so that all the musicians at our
school can rock out as loud as they want!


![Just some lunch](img/some-lunch.jpg)

One tricky part of discovering the perfect home for the school was find a
location that had both accessibility to urban resources like shops and
restaurants, but also had it’s own green space for outdoor play at school.
We’ve found the perfect mix at our new building where we’ve got a big green
field, yet are still less than half a mile from the local businesses, like
Zeke’s coffee shop and the Red Canoe bookshop, on Harford Road. The field is
like a blank canvas - a full acre of flat, green grass just waiting to be
transformed into a natural playscape right in the heart of Baltimore city. The
surrounding neighborhood provides safe, residential streets that are perfect
for casual strolls on warmer days.

We’d love to show you our beautiful new campus - come check it out at our [next
open house](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1rbowCIad1VC8l_GOoP-0gcIBhH8DXWnw1RzbobY6q4w/viewform)!


![Lunch Shelves](img/lunch-shelves.jpg)
