Start at the beginning
---

![Sit back and realx](img/tree-relaxing.jpg)


OLD ATTEMPT FOR “MODEL”. Had idea to break it into three parts: individual,
community, and democratic justice. 

## Sudbury Model

Our model of education rests on three basic components: individualism,
community, and democratic justice.

It starts with the individual. This is both the input and output, ultimately,
of all schools. Our model starts with a fundamental respect and acceptance for
the individual as they are. We have no plans to change an individual;
individuals change themselves for their own purposes. We do not judge, we do
not praise, we do not expect, we do not condemn. We do provide reasonable
support for individual’s interests. And we marvel at the independence and
innovation that we witness from our students.

But an individual is insufficient. The community is a fertile ground for which
individuals can learn much. More importantly, the community is a natural
constraint on their activities. Constraints are powerful motivators for
creating and achieving.

Balancing the needs of the community and the individual is where democratic
justice comes into play. This is the functional form of our school. Our School
Meeting is equally open to both students and staff. This is where the rules of
our community are democratically decided. We also have Judicial Committee
where students and staff gather in a jury-type system to adjudicate
allegations of rule breaking.

In both School Meeting and Judicial Committee, members of the community seek
understanding by listening to one another. Everyone is given equal voice and
an equal hearing. In many ways, the crucial aspect of both processes is not
the result, but the journey. It is through being heard and listening that we
draw understanding and compassion for one another.

### History

We model our school on Sudbury Valley School, established in 1968. They have
had over 40 years to explore and understand this model. Their literature is
extensive and highly recommended for learning more about the model. They have
theoretical underpinnings, many anecdotes, and studies of graduates.

Throughout it all, the results have been impressive. With no formal education
process, generations of students have successfully been prepared for adult
life. They learn how to be confident, independent, community-minded adults who
aggressively pursue a meaningful life.

Those who pursue a formal academic education do not find their lack of
traditional academic preparations to be a problem at all. Rather, they find
that the life skills that they have acquired allow them to easily master the
missing academic pieces quickly and readily.

There is no formal body that decides if a school is a Sudbury school or not.
It is a self-decided label. Each school should be examined on its own merits.

### Age-Mixing

By having a proper community of free individuals, we have as natural
consequence that children of different ages mix freely. The advantage for the
younger ones is that of challenge while the advantage for the older ones is
that of compassion. The free exchange of skills and interests benefits both
sides tremendously and is a huge asset for this model.


### Acceptance

![Stripes of every color](img/hair.jpg)

A key component of this model is the acceptance of the individual. There is no
notion that a student needs to be doing such-and-such a thing in order to be a
better person. The core belief in this model is that the internal dynamics of
a growing individual coupled with the environment of the community will
naturally lead each student down their own satisfying path. Each path will
look very different and that is a good thing.

We have no curriculum, we do not praise, and we do not criticize. We do
genuinely show our authentic emotions -- joy at something delightful,
frustration at annoyances. We concern us with the now, not the future. That
allows students to naturally grow into a future of their own making.

### Learning

Our focus is not on teaching, as we generally do not do teaching. Our focus is
on learning. Students explore whatever interests them and in a fashion that
makes sense to themselves. Success or failure is never an issue. They are
learning regardless of outcomes.

Much of what they learn in their activities is how to learn. They learn that
you first kind of make a mess as you explore an idea. Then, if you pursue it,
it takes dedicated repetitive practice to get good at it. And along the way,
they learn how to learn from others: how to seek out someone more knowledgable
and how to listen to them as they explain something difficult.

We often witness students who are learning a subject seek out not the most
knowledgeable person on the subject around, but rather someone who is just
somewhat ahead in knowledge level. This is similar to age-mixing though the
mentor has a good chance of being the younger. The idea though is that there
is a mutual enhancement when the levels of abilities are not that different.
There is much less frustration and much less feeling of inadequacy.

### Constraints

Creative people know that constraints are what drive good designs. Humans can
be overwhelmed by choices. But when there are constraints to overcome and work
with, humans shine. This holds for all ages. We see it quite often with
children who at first will rail against not being able to get what they want.
But once they accept the constraint, they happily work with it to make
something delightful.

Constraints in our school come largely from being a part of a community. This
is a good thing. Our students learn how to respect others while still
achieving their own, possibly modified, goals. This is how adult life is as
well and is likely an important part of how Sudbury graduates can navigate a
variety of different paths in life with ease.

## Environment

Humans in general learn a lot from their environment. We all watch and learn
from others, taking clues from those around us on how to behave and what to
do. It is what people do, rather than what they say, which has the most
impact.

Thus we see that waves of excitement over this or that come over our
community. An individual brings interests to our community and then the
community takes those interests and broadcasts it to the individuals.

Likewise, our system of rules is not studied by anyone. Rather, rule following
is modeled by the majority of the community and hence each individual is
strongly led to follow those same rules. In instances where an individual does
deviate, our judicial committee intervenes. This prevents a negative
environment from taking over.

## Judicial Committee

At the heart of our democratic justice is the judicial committee.

## School Meeting

School Meeting is the foundation for our justice system. It is the body that


![Age mixing and smiles](img/smiles.jpg)

## Corporations and Clerkships

We do have other institutional roles. Much of the administrative needs rest in
the hands of the clerks. ...

Corporations are groups of school meeting members that come together for
common purpose and generally have a budget approved by School Meeting. The
idea of a corporation is that it is a self-governing body of those interested
in doing something. That is to say, instead of being legislated by the entire
school, the governance of a corporation is done directly by those affected by
it.

This is a core concept that runs through all of our school: Governance by
consent of the governed. When an issue applies to the school as a whole, it
goes through School Meeting or the decision is made by a clerk that has been
elected by the whole school. If something only applies to a small subset of
the school, then that subset makes the decision or elects the corporation
officers who make the decisions.

### Empowerment

Our democratic justice system empowers our students to find their voice as
individuals and as part of the community. They quickly change roles from
defendant to plaintiff to juror. They go from rule breakers to rule makers.
They learn to look out for one another and for our system as a whole.

This is the essence of what they all learn at our school. There is much else
that they learn, much of it unique to the individual, but everyone in our
community learns how to be an individual inside a community.

### Safety

A fundamental attribute for any school is for it to be safe. Our school we
view as incredibly safe and safe in multiple ways.

To start with, staff provide the adult presence to ward off and deal with any
external threats. Should any situation ever come close to being dangerous, the
adults will make sure to end the threat. This is as it should be in any
school.

But in our school, every student is a pair of eyes. The students trust the
adults and want the best for their school and their community. If any of our
students starts to feel uncertain about safety, they instantly find an adult.

What our model does not do is shrink-wrap the students. They are free to
explore their own comfort boundaries and go beyond them, extending their
comfort levels. We find that when left to their own, they err on the cautious
side. They may bump their elbows or scrape their knees and such minor
incidents give them plenty of incentive to be more careful. In the rare
instances when a child might be trying to go too far, again there are plenty
of eyes from the community and voices urging caution. In the extreme, an adult
is consulted.

That is all with regards to physical safety. Emotional safety is, arguably,
more important. This is where the model shines. The entire community accepts
and cares for its members. They may not all be friends, but there is a common
bond that makes each member of the community feel welcomed and cared about.

We do not judge, we do not label, and we do not rank. There is no social
hierarchy that leads to stress and rejections. Adults do not stigmatize any of
the students. There is no emotional violence visited upon students in the name
of education.

This is not to be underestimated. Our students enjoy coming to school. It is a
place of safety and of fun. It is their second home.

### Hard Work

Our school is very hard. All that happens within our walls is authentic.
Students are constantly making decisions, negotiating with others, and
figuring stuff out. If student A wants to play with student B, then A must
figure out how to make that happen without adult intervention and without
coercion. That can be incredibly difficult.

Their minds and bodies are constantly in motion. Emotions whirl up and down
throughout the day. Imaginations run wild even as their feet move from one
room to another.     


