I get it, but what about ...
---

Also see http://sudburyschoolofatlanta.org/ssa-education/questions/ which also
inspired some of the below text. 

## … reading?

Children learn to read in a variety of ways at their own timing. Some learn at
age 4 and others learn when they are 9. When they learn, they learn quickly.
By letting them find their own way, their joy of reading is undiminished. 

We live in a literate society, in which reading and writing are necessary
skills. Children are highly motivated to acquire these skills as they are
fundamental to simply getting around, let alone to serving any specialized
needs.

[Peter Gray’s “Children Teach Themselves to
Read”](https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/freedom-learn/201002/children-teach-themselves-read)
is an excellent article for gaining a proper perspective on children learning
to read on their own. Of particular note is the point that late readers are
not distinguishable from early readers within a couple of years of common
reading ability.


## … math?

Much like reading, basic arithmetic is a useful skill that children pick up
easily as they need it. They use numbers in daily life, such as when dealing
with money, dividing things up, deciding how long a turn should be, etc., and
they get a natural feeling for their use.

The more advanced mathematics are not picked up naturally, but they are easily
learned when there is need. There is ample evidence of this in the history of
Sudbury schools. For example, college entrance tests require some mathematical
knowledge which Sudbury students pick up with a few weeks of dedicated
effort.

Our model also has the additional feature that none of our students learn to
fear or hate mathematics. Instead, they see it as a tool that they can master
just as they can master any other skill that they may need.


## … getting into college?

The admissions processes of colleges vary and student experience will vary as
well, but the experience to date is that students who wish to go to college do
not have problems. If there are tests that need taking, they prepare for them.
If there are prerequisites that they can fill, they do so. If not, they
negotiate their way around them quite skillfully and with a high success
rate.

As with most roles in society, being accepted is more a matter of personality
and clarity of thought rather than a simple list of skills. Our students can
easily talk with adults. They are able to express themselves with focus and
coherence derived from years of negotiating complex and ever-changing needs
and pressures within their schools. This is an impressive marker of maturity
to those who serve on admissions boards.

Once admitted, they also do not have any particular problems with their chosen
courses of study. While they may have never taken a formal class before, they
are well-equipped to learn what they need to learn in order to succeed at
college. They have spent their educations up to this point creating and
achieving goals using the resources around them. It is just the same in
college. They work hard, as they have chosen to be there, and they unafraid to
use professors and other resource centers made available by colleges for this
very purpose. The initiative and savvy of Sudbury students make them ideal
college students.

They are also not overly distracted by the social scene at college. They have
have had many years of socializing freely and the move to a college dorm is
not the overwhelming novelty for them that it can be for students who have
been sheltered from choice and risk. For Sudbury students, college is a place
to learn academic material and receive credentials that they believe will be
of use to them in their chosen path in life. Thus, they work hard.

Much of our experience is derived from the stories of the nearly 50 year old
Sudbury Valley School. They have reported, after conducting extensive alumni
studies, that of the over 80% of their graduates who choose to pursue higher
education, almost all get into their first choice of schools. For those who do
not pursue a college education, the choice is a self-interested one that
allows them to go directly into the field of their choosing. 

As for A&I, of our two graduates thus far, one is studying photography at the
college of his choice - which he was accepted to without a diploma or SAT
scores - and the other is a professional pastry chef at a high end restaurant
- his dream job that he apprenticed for while attending A&I.


## … screen time?

It is quite possible that your child will spend all day on the computer at
times - and that’s okay! With all of the negative media attention surrounding
screen time, it is not surprising that many parents are concerned about this.
We at Arts & Ideas recognize that computers are the most important tools of
modern society and that there are many proven, studied advantages to playing
with them regularly. Furthermore, computers and gaming are very social
activities at our school in which students engage with each other, learn from
each other, and problem-solve together. 

We also find that with everything going on at our school, it is nearly
impossible for any one child to do only one thing, all day, every day,
forever. We see even the screen-obsessed kids (the ones learning to code a new
Minecraft mod, or spending hours working on a tiny animation detail of a new
video), take breaks to challenge themselves to go out of their comfort zone by
climbing a tree or playing a game of soccer. When kids feel comfortable in
their safe space - whether that be near a screen or not - they gain the
confidence in themselves and bravery to try something new. 


## … exposure? How do students know what they don’t know?

We live in the information age, where knowledge is available at your
fingertips. In this context, and especially at a Sudbury school, where
conversation flows freely and without time limits, it would be an enormously
difficult task not to be exposed to all kinds of topics and information.
Because students are free to explore and interact with other students and
adults of all ages with all different backgrounds, they are naturally exposed
to a wide variety of topics.  Students follow their curiosity and interest,
which isn’t limited to a set curriculum. Have you ever met a young child that
doesn’t like asking questions? At A&I, this curiosity isn’t squashed when the
child enrolls at school - instead it is encouraged and allowed to blossom into
all kinds of information exploring and gathering. It is unsurprising then that
when we do hear from parents on the matter of exposure, the question is almost
always “How did my son/daughter know that?”

… supplementary instruction?  “Just as eating against one’s will is injurious
to health, so studying without a liking for it spoils the memory, and it
retains nothing it takes in.” ~ Leonardo da Vinci

Some people immediately see the social value of our school and think they can
fill the perceived academic void by having their child follow an online
curriculum at home, by visiting a weekly tutor, or by engaging in nightly
homeschool-esque lessons with the parent. These kinds of activities are fine,
if and only if it is truly your child’s choice to engage in them. However, any
type of academics or extracurricular activity that is forced upon your child
is contrary to our school’s philosophy and will undermine their experience at
school.  Insistence on supplementary activities sends a mixed-message to your
child that school is for playing/socializing and the “real” learning takes
place at home. The challenge thrust upon children in Sudbury schools, to make
themselves using the confidence from their parents’ trust, instead becomes a
challenge of how to directly please mom and dad. In fact, that challenge often
distorts itself into that of how to reconcile what the parents say (“We trust
you”), with the lack of trust inherent in dictating what the child ought to be
interested in. This is an extremely difficult place for a child to be put in
and ultimately ends up severely damaging their trust in themselves and renders
their Sudbury school experience an unfulfilled promise.  This confusion of
educational purpose not only adversely affects the individual child but the
entire school community. The one child who perceives his/her learning
experience at school as either an impossible task at best, or a lie at worst,
will naturally influence peers with that attitude. It is the job of the parent
to support their child at a Sudbury school by consistently delivering the
message that what the child chooses to engage in at school is important,
valuable, “real learning,” and enough - simply because it is what they’ve
chosen to engage in.

## … structure? My kid needs structure.

Structure is important, and Sudbury Schools provide the time and space for
students to develop their own structure, beginning with how they will
structure their day to how they will structure their lives. What do kids do
when they get together without adults? They create structure! They make up
games with complicated rules and create structure for themselves all through
their day.

Our students have the ability to come to School Meeting to create structure
for the whole school by deciding rules and procedures. These governing bodies
and processes are detailed in [Our Structure]. At other schools, students must
follow structure that may or may not have meaning for them, and often have
little or any chance to change that structure, whereas at A&I the rules and
the structures are created by students for students.


## … teachers? What do the teachers do?

“What I have learned, very slowly and painfully over the years, is that
children make vital decisions for themselves in ways that no adults could have
anticipated or even imagined.” ~ Hanna Greenberg, founder of Sudbury Valley
School, in The Art of Doing Nothing

We have no teachers. The adults employed by the school are staff and are
responsible for the administration and upkeep of the school as delegated to
them by School Meeting. Staff are community elders, subject matter experts,
janitors, advocates, curious students, and responsible School Meeting Members.
Elected positions for staff have them managing finances, administering the
admissions process, tracking attendance, communicating with parents, planning
PR events, cleaning and maintaining the property, and everything that it takes
to run a school. Students may also serve in many of these roles. 

As students and staff have equal standing in an institutional sense,
relationships between students and staff tend to be collegial. As in any
community, staff and students will develop closer relationships with those
they have affinity for and will naturally influence each other’s interests and
activities. Staff do not artificially seize “teachable moments” as is often
discussed in conventional educational models, but, like anyone, are certainly
apt to expound on topics they feel passionately about if a student brings it
up.




FAQ from the Summer 2014 pamphlet:

How are students evaluated?

Students are not evaluated at Arts & Ideas through standardized testing,
report cards or assessments. By not imposing a system for evaluating students,
we preserve natural curiosity, intrinsic motivation and confidence in ideas.
If a child is always looking outside for approval or recognition, development
of self-assessment habits and introspective skills are lost.  We aim to
preserve student privacy and value our school as a place to build authentic
staff/student relationships. We view school as a place for students to
practice autonomy and independence away from home in preparation for
adulthood.

My child needs structure Structure is important, and Sudbury Schools provide
the time and space for students to develop their own structure, beginning with
how they will structure their day to how they will structure their lives. What
do kids do when they get together without adults? They create structure! They
make up games with complicated rules and create structure for themselves all
through their day.  They come to School Meeting and create structure for the
school by deciding rules and procedures.  At other schools, students must
follow structure that may or may not have meaning for them, and often have
little or any chance to change that structure.

How are the school rules established? What happens when they are broken?  All
students and staff make the rules and manage day to day activities together.
Students and staff have equal democratic rights to draft and amend rules,
support those rules and administrate conflict resolution and judicial process.
In School Meeting, which meets twice-weekly and as needed, staff and students
meet to propose, discuss and vote on rules, policies and concerns of the
school's operation, including the school budget and staff employment.
Likewise, a Judicial Committee made of students and staff, meet daily to
address disputes and respond to breeches of the law. These two functions
distinguish our approach and help students take responsibility for their
actions and understand their potential to meaningfully contribute to a
community.

Is there bullying at your school?

Bullying is uncommon at Sudbury schools, since students freely age-mix and
choose their own activities. To address the rare occurrence of bullying,
School Meeting has enacted multiple laws that may be called upon when
needed.

How do students know their choices?

All students and staff are considered resources in our school. Every day we
each bring with us our diverse backgrounds, passions, great finds, stories,
and more, which infuses and influences the school culture. Beyond staff and
students, we have books, computers, and community resources available.
Children pick things up as adults do: through conversation, interactions and
following what is interesting. The idea that we have to expose children to all
of human learning before they are 18 is misguided and impossible.  Aristotle
said, “All men by nature desire knowledge.” You can’t stop the drive of
children to acquire knowledge and achieve mastery in subjects they are
passionate about, unless they equate learning with drudgery. This drive opens
up the world of information to them. The issue in the information age is not
how to get information, but how to use it well. Decades of Sudbury graduates
provide real evidence that this approach works.  

How do the different age groups mix?  Just as adults work with and benefit
from having colleagues of all ages, students are free to interact with each
other based on shared interests or other commonalities, not just the year they
were born. Even staff is included in the age mixing. When younger and older
students freely associate, learning accelerates. Older students are able to
practice skills they have recently mastered, making them ideal teachers. They
develop leadership, nurturance and a sense of responsibility for others, while
reaffirming what they have learned through demonstration and explanation.
Younger students have the opportunity to engage in more complex activities
than they could with only same-agers. They gain exposure to more advanced
skills and knowledge and develop role models. 

What kind of student thrives at your school?

There is no typical Sudbury student. A wide variety of children attend Arts &
Ideas and become successful members of our community. Because of the
free-flowing atmosphere, each student is allowed to follow their own pursuits
at their own pace. The active student can move around spontaneously and jump
from one activity to another. The academic can explore any subject in depth
and work on projects for as long as they choose. The social student can
converse with students and staff of all ages. The reserved student can observe
others and speak up when ready. At A&I, students can be themselves and are
respected for their individuality.

Don’t students just play all day?

We firmly believe in the power of play; play being any activity with no known
outcome.  Play, without adult interference, is essential to a child’s healthy
social, emotional, intellectual, physical development. When adults play, and
we call it Research and Development. We do not attempt to interfere, modify,
or validate any activity a student chooses to do. At our school, playing dodge
ball is as valuable as playing computer as playing teacher. It is through play
that students are able to concentrate, engage, imagine, work out their
differences, handle their emotions and communicate. Play enables our students
to explore their curiosities; to discover their abilities and talents, likes
and dislikes. At our school, play is how kids educate themselves.

How do kids learn?  Learning takes place all day long, in the real world and
at school, from childhood through adulthood, whether we are consciously
seeking out information or not. Our school provides a rich environment where
staff and students pursue a variety of pursuits.  Our students learn to read,
write, do math, and other traditionally academic subjects because they wish to
or because it is a means to a goal of their choosing.  In addition, they are
learning important life skills necessary for navigating the real world; life
skills that are the by-product of the structure and time the school
provides.

