FAQ 
---


Is there homework?

No. Arts & Ideas is a democratic school and therefore does not impose
curricular tasks of any kind upon students. With that said, students often
fluidly carry on self-initiated projects back and forth between home and
school. Learn more in [The Model].

How is the school governed and run?

The school is governed by bodies of students and staff empowered by the
school’s bylaws to manage the school’s operation. See more in [Our
Structure].


Is the school similar to other alternative schools I’ve heard of before?

Please see our [Okay, so you’re sort of like…] page for a discussion on the
similarities and differences between our school and some others you may have
heard of.

How much does it cost?

Please see our [Tuition] page.

Is financial aid available?

Yes. The school offers need-based financial aid to those who apply to help
offset tuition.

What is the school’s yearly schedule?

Arts & Ideas operates with a schedule similar to neighboring public schools,
including summer vacation, winter break, and spring break. See our [calendar]
for more information.

What are the attendance requirements?

The school is open from 8:15 AM - 5:45 PM. To receive credit for a full day of
attendance, students are required to be present for a total of at least 5
hours, and those 5 hours must include the core hours of 11:00 AM - 3:00 PM.
The school offers extended drop-off and pick-up hours from 8:00 AM - 6:00 PM
for an additional fee for those families who consistently require it.

When can we enroll?

A&I enrolls throughout the year. Please see our [Admissions] page for more
information.

Does the school serve meals?

No, Arts & Ideas does not serve meals. Most students bring lunches from home,
however, our off-campus policy permits students to buy lunch from nearby
restaurants and shops.

Is transportation provided?

A&I’s families come from all over the Baltimore area and we, therefore, do not
offer transportation to and from school each day. Transportation for field
trips is often provided by chaperone parents or, in the event of a
non-chaperoned trip, the school may provide transportation by bus or van. Many
families utilize carpooling arrangements for daily school commuting. 

Is there a daily schedule?

The school has a few institutional activities that run on a schedule (Judicial
Committee every day at 11:30, chore time every day at 2:30, and School Meeting
Tuesdays at 1:00), but students themselves have no set schedules other than
what they might decide to make for themselves. As you may imagine, daily
personal activities at Arts & Ideas are widely varied from student to student,
day to day. On any given day at school, you might see students climbing trees
in the yard, eating lunch on the front steps, planning and cooking for a bake
sale at school, playing Minecraft in the computer lab, practicing coding or
animation skills on laptops, recording a new song in the music room, scripting
and holding auditions for a play, filming a stop animation short in the video
room, conversing about current events with staff in the office, walking to the
nearby coffee shop for a hot chocolate, chatting and laughing with friends on
a comfy couch in a sunny spot, researching an interesting topic on the
internet, reading, writing stories or preparing a poem for Poetry Club,
creating comic books, building a dollhouse, trying to fix a broken computer,
or building a hamster track out of blocks. Come back the next day and you’ll
probably see a whole new set of activities!

Do you accept students with disabilities?

Arts & Ideas enrolls students with disabilities on a case-by-case basis.
Regardless of any disability, all students need to be able to be independent,
keep themselves safe without constant adult supervision, and handle their own
needs (such as eating and going to the bathroom). While we do not provide any
specific accommodations for students with disabilities (like occupational
therapy or speech services, for example), we have had many students who
required services or medications in previous educational settings do just fine
here. In many ways, every student at A&I is on their own IEP (Individualized
Education Plan), in that they have the space, time, and freedom to be
themselves and learn in whatever way makes sense for them. We have had many
students achieve great success at Arts & Ideas that have been diagnosed with
Autism, Dyslexia, ADD, ADHD, Emotional or other Mood disorders, among
others.

What resources are available at school?

Just like our law book, the resources available at school ebb and flow based
on current student interests. Over the years, we have amassed certain
consistently popular resources. These include our robust Music Room, which
boasts many instruments as well as recording equipment and amplifiers. Our Art
Room is well stocked with paints, crayons, pencils, markers, paper of all
kinds, a sewing machine, fabric, hot glue guns, yarn and knitting needles,
stickers, stamps, clay, and more! The Video Room is where students can use
video equipment to record stop animation shorts or live action videos. Many
students also enjoy editing videos and exploring the animation process with
our access to professional editing software. Our commercial kitchen is fully
decked out with pizza ovens, industrial fridges and freezers, a deep fryer,
ice machine, and separate dishwashing room. The library is bursting with books
suitable for all types and ages of readers; we also have a parent library full
of books about or related to the Sudbury model that are free to borrow. Our
gym room has a kip bar, practice balance beam, yoga mats, and gymnastics mats
to create a safe space for flipping and tumbling. We have lots of science
equipment, including bunsen burners, scales, and glassware. As the school
continues to grow and settle into it’s new home, we can’t wait to see how our
students continue to fill it with all their ideas! Please see [Our Space] for
pictures and more information about our facilities.

Are there field trips?

We love taking field trips at Arts & Ideas. Some trips are primarily planned
and executed by staff, while others are largely coordinated by students. Just
a few field trips we’ve gone on over the years include: taking the light rail
to the Baltimore Aquarium, listening to all kinds of concerts at The Peabody,
seeing plays at The Baltimore Theatre Project, exploring for treasures and
learning more about the ecosystem at the nearby Herring Run Park, hiking,
overnight camping at the beach in Delaware, and engaging in all kinds of
outdoor fun at Camp Puh’Tok. 

Is A&I an arts school?

In short, sorta. Please see the [Our Story] page for a more in-depth
explanation of our name from co-founder, Caroline Chavasse.

Do students receive a high school diploma upon graduation?

The diploma granted by Arts & Ideas to students who complete our graduation
process is not a high school equivalence diploma, although it, along with the
requisite thesis, is a document that students can and do use for college and
job applications. Some students do choose to pursue a GED while they are
enrolled as well, although many do not as they are not usually required for
college admissions or hiring. Please see our [I get it, but what about…?] page
for more information on college and career for Sudbury graduates.

How does graduation work?

Arts & Ideas, like most Sudbury Schools, offers a diploma process involving a
written thesis and defense process for those students aged 16+ who choose to
undertake it. By November of their graduation year, students intending to
graduate must declare their intent and begin to prepare their thesis to answer
the question, ‘How have I prepared to enter the world beyond school?’
Throughout the year and with the help of an advisory committee, the student
works to prepare a written piece explaining their answer, as well as any other
supplemental materials (be they written, performed, or otherwise documented)
to help support their case. In the springtime, a panel of staff members from
neighboring Sudbury schools convenes to hear the student’s thesis and defense.
The panel then votes to grant or deny a diploma. Whether or not the diploma is
granted, the student may choose to graduate and move on to the next stage in
their life. In the event that they are denied the diploma and are still 18 or
younger, they may continue to attend Arts & Ideas and attempt the diploma
process again in the following year. The diploma process is not mandatory and,
as long as a student is of age to leave school, they need not necessarily
undertake it to graduate. It is an optional process that many, but not all,
teenagers who are leaving the school wish to undertake, often as a capstone of
their experience at the school.

What is the school’s legal structure?

Arts & Ideas is a church-exempt non-public school under the auspices of the
Arcadian Fellowship Church. The Arcadian Fellowship is a non-denominational
non-profit created alongside the school whose mission is to support democratic
education for all children. The school practices no religious observances, nor
does the Arcadian Fellowship make decisions pertaining to the school’s day to
day operation.

