Introduction to Our Model
---

Arts & Ideas Sudbury School is modeled after Sudbury Valley School, the first
school of its kind, founded in 1968. At A&I, students and staff run the school
together through a democratic structure in which every staff and student has
one vote in every decision made. With no curriculum, no required academics,
no testing and a daily schedule left up to each student to decide for
themselves, students at A&I are free to learn, explore, and reflect at their own
pace in a manner that work best for them.

Our viewpoint is that children are already amazing people. They are driven to
explore life and all of its many complexities. Our humble goal is to do no 
harm and to trust children to find the path that works for them. 

The natural mode of learning for children is play. Play is their way to model
reality. Just as scientists work with models to study features within systems,
children play with the features of their lives in order to understand them as
parts of a larger whole.  Along the way, they practice communication,
problem-solving, leadership, and creativity, as well as reading, writing, and
math.

As they play and learn, children also practice how to express and cope with
the range of human emotions. They learn from their own experiences and help
each other journey through moments of joy, sadness, compassion, anger, and
other strong emotions that can take years to master.

!model-01.jpg

How do we know all this? Because we see this every day at our school. Our
children are given the freedom to be children and, thus, they learn to be
adults. They make their own decisions about what to do and how to fit into
their own authentic community.

What do children do at our school?  They are playing, socializing, thinking,
observing, planning events, and doing projects of their own. They may be
engaged in gymnastics, programming, fort-building, mathematics, painting,
video editing, musical instrument playing, woodworking, writing, dancing,
storytelling, history, reading, Minecraft-ing, and whatever else strikes their
fancy at the moment.  Learning is highly individualized and varies from person
to person and from moment to moment.

Regardless of the specific activities our children pursue, what they are truly
learning is how to learn.  This core learning explains how generations of
Sudbury students, many of whom have never taken a formal class, thrive both at
college and in the working world.  They have learned how to focus, how to
explore, how to ask questions, how to master something that interests them,
and how to take failure, as well as success, in stride as steps towards
achieving their own goals.

The students and staff are all members of the school community. They learn from
one another. The staff ensure that the school environment is safe,
appropriately supportive, and run in a democratic fashion.  All school members
have equal rights, which means having equal voice in both making the rules and
adjudicating them. Students of all ages treat this process
seriously, and their ensuing discussions balance the needs of the community
with compassion for their peers, leading to respectful outcomes for all
involved.

Read on to see and understand how we honor children and their
amazing capacities to fully engage in meaningful learning experiences.
Alternative education takes a whole new meaning at our school with our focus
on learning instead of teaching. 

