Our Staff
---

Caroline Chavasse (cofounder & staff) is the mother of two children and was a
Professor of Video Art at the Maryland Institute College of Art for 7 years.
She has presented master classes in Digital Video and Media Production at the
Gilman School and has taught theatre workshops at University of Michigan,
Middlebury College and Meredith College in Raleigh, NC. Caroline cofounded and
operated, along with some terrific parents, the Free School Preschool and a
community play group in Hamilton that ran for 5 years.  Before moving to
Baltimore in 2000, Caroline worked with LeVar Burton at his film company at
Paramount Studios in Los Angeles, helping to develop family-friendly
entertainment for television and film and also on his Emmy award-winning PBS
educational series, Reading Rainbow. Caroline has an extensive background in
theatre and television performing in New York City for ten years Off-Off
Broadway and regionally in Chicago, Milwaukee, Los Angeles, Richmond, North
Carolina and Vermont. She's enjoyed working with such luminaries as Phillip
Seymour Hoffman and Mary-Louise Parker. Her one-woman show, a blend of
monologue, comedy and dance, received critical acclaim and was developed into
a short independent film. Caroline has appeared in numerous television
commercials nationally and locally, as well as on "The Wire." Some of her
favorite things are history, vocabulary, cartooning, dog training,
choreography and dance, video making and editing, reading stories aloud,
camping and hiking, and working and playing with the exquisite young people at
Arts & Ideas.


Brooke Pazoles (staff) Brooke is a recent graduate from the University of
Delaware, where she majored in elementary education. Even though she has a
teacher’s certificate on paper, her experience at UD was not like any other up
and coming teacher’s. After spending time in real classrooms during her early
college career, Brooke soon became aware of the atrocities taking place in
public school systems today. She almost dropped her major to pursue a totally
different career, but was steered to research Sudbury education by a professor
turned mentor. Brooke was hooked immediately, and spent the rest of her time
at college pushing the University to support her in her quest to complete her
student teaching placement – and eventually become a full-time staff member –
at a Sudbury school. After much deliberation, UD finally allowed Brooke to
serve her student teaching placement at The Philadelphia Free School, a new
Sudbury school in South Philly. While at PFS, Brooke’s passion for Sudbury
education blossomed and grew. Her time as an intern there solidified her dream
to pursue staffing at a Sudbury school as her career.  Brooke is originally
from Bainbridge Island, a tiny island off of Seattle. She spent most of her
childhood outside, building tree forts, picking blackberries, and getting
intro trouble with her cohort of neighborhood friends.  Brooke enjoys playing
the flute (she’s been playing since age 4), building DIY projects for her
home, learning and practicing web design and coding, discovering new
restaurants, and snuggling with her three cats. She also cares deeply about
community service and giving her time and resources to those in need. She
spent much of her time at college volunteering for organizations like Habitat
for Humanity, and spent her final spring break rebuilding homes that were
destroyed by hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, where she met lots of inspiring
people and little lizards (see picture).

Phil Glaser (staff) was born and raised in Olney, MD, a suburb of Washington
DC. His father, a public high school math teacher, and his mother, an IT
administrator at a major corporation, fostered his gravitation towards things
technical early on. His childhood fascination with technology and subsequent
public high school engineering education led him to attend the University of
Maryland school of engineering, where he immediately felt like he was missing
out. Having been exposed to a variety of places and ways of life through
travel as a young child and teenager, he also became aware of and interested
in the foreign and unknown. His curiosity led him to leave the fields of
engineering and computer science in favor of studying linguistics and Germanic
Studies, for which he earned his Bachelor's in 2011.  Phil's college decisions
provided him the opportunity to study abroad in Germany, which, in turn, led
him to pursue further travel opportunities. In search of a sustainable and
meaningful career after college, he spent two years living and working as a
homesteader in northern California and western North Carolina, and as an EFL
(English as a Foreign Language) teacher in Harbin, China. After teaching
English in China, he enrolled in a Master's of Education program (in ESOL) at
University of Maryland. During his time spent student-teaching and wrestling
with the realities of public schools, he discovered the Sudbury model and Arts
& Ideas in particular with the help of a couple of free-thinking professors.
Though he does not wish to teach in public schools, he is grateful to have
been in the Master's program, if only for the fact that he discovered
alternative models through it.  As staff at Arts & Ideas, Phil hopes to bring
his continued interest in computers and technology to help provide the tech
facilities required to keep up with the school community's ever-expanding
curiosity and imagination. As well, he hopes to one day establish an exchange
program of some sort with other Sudbury schools, both American and
international.


James Taylor (staff) is a proud father, credentialed mathematician, heretical
physicist, and passionate (web) programmer. While he has had a life-long
dislike of traditional schooling, it was not until Arts & Ideas moved into his
backyard that he first heard about the Sudbury way. He became an immediate
advocate for the school in the neighborhood and proceeded to learn more about
it. Having finally seen the solution as to how to let children live their life
with respect, he just had to join up.  James has a PhD in mathematics from
Rutgers University. His specialty is in the mathematics of quantum mechanics
on curved space. With over a decade of teaching mathematics, he has met many
students whose traditional mathematical education left them ignorant and
fearful of mathematics. For the past few years, James has had the very
rewarding experience, while teaching online for Johns Hopkins University, of
converting math phobics into math geeks. He has done this by encouraging his
students to explore their life using mathematics, asking and answering their
own relevant questions.  James has learned quite a lot from his daughter. She
taught him that even at a very early age, children are quite capable of
handling their own learning needs. He has watched with amazement how she
continually tries to do as much as she can on her own while she happily
acknowledges that some stuff will have to wait until she is "a big girl". He
loves spending time with his daughter, marveling at the sheer wonder and joy
she has for the world, never knowing what new delight awaits around the next
corner. He is relieved to have found an educational model that will nurture
that joy instead of squashing it.

Danny Mydlack (cofounder and former staff) is tenured Associate Professor of
Electronic Media at Towson University where he teaches American History &
Media Culture, and Television, Documentary and New Media Production. Danny is
the Director of the award-winning documentary"Voices from the New American
Schoolhouse," internationally the most widely-screened documentary on
democratic education. As well, locally, he cofounded in 2003 the Baltimore
Freeschool Preschool, the precursor to Arts & Ideas. Danny has held academic
posts as Studio Instructor at The University of California San Diego,
Professor of Television Production at George Washington University and
Departmental Chair at the Maryland Institute College of Art and has presented
to education workshops, screenings and to symposia throughout the United
States and in Europe. He began work in school reform 38 years ago, founding
the Independent Learning Center at Fairhaven High School where he attended. He
contributed as a research assistant in technology and education in the 1980s
in Boston under technology and learning expert Seymoure Pappertand in the
1990s at the University of California, San Diego under American Educational
Research Association award recipient Dr. Hugh Mehan where he was also employed
by the nationally-recognized Center for Teacher Development. Danny is a
lifelong student and mentee of NAEA Viktor Lowenfeld Award recipient Dr. Peter
London.


