OUR SPACE
---

After years of searching and planning, Arts & Ideas is thrilled to finally be
in our very own building! Our main building is about 12,000 square feet spaced
over 4 floors, including a lovely historic section and a substantial and
modern addition featuring an elevator. In the basement, we have a rec room
with lockers and sports equipment, as well as a woodworking shop chock-full of
tools ready to tackle any project. On the first floor, there’s a
library/quiet/study space with plenty of comfy arm chairs, just down the hall
from an industrial, restaurant grade kitchen complete with all the basics
along with some fun extras like pizza ovens and deep fryers. The office also
lives on the first floor, where you’ll find students and staff coming and
going throughout the day. Upstairs, you’ll find students playing games like
Minecraft or practicing coding skills in our computer lab, rehearsing advanced
gymnastics techniques in our gym room, and flexing their creativity by making
extraordinary projects in the art room, or recording stop animation movies and
youtube videos in the video recording studio. There’s also plenty of versatile
hang out spaces that are perfect for impromptu board games, science
experiments, or simply spending time with friends. All our instruments,
including guitars, a drumset, and piano, as well as music recording equipment
are housed in the neighboring carriage house, another building on the property
that’s about 900 square feet. We love having the music room in a separate
building so that all the musicians at our school can rock out as loud as they
want to! 

One tricky part of discovering the perfect home for the school was
finding a location that had both accessibility to urban resources like shops
and restaurants, but also had it’s own green space for outdoor play at school.
We’ve found the perfect mix at our new building where we’ve got a big grassy
green field, yet are still less than half a mile from the local businesses,
like Zeke’s coffee shop and the Red Canoe cafe and bookshop on Harford Road.
The field is like a blank canvas - a full acre of flat, green grass just
waiting to be transformed into a natural playscape right in Baltimore City.
The surrounding neighborhood provides safe, residential streets that are
perfect for casual strolls on warmer days. 

We’d love to show you our
beautiful new campus - come check it out at our next open house! [link to open
house schedule]


