Our Structure
---

The school’s governance is handled by bodies empowered to manage the entirety
of the school’s needs in the attempt to preserve democratic ideals to the
greatest practical extent.

School Meeting

The overarching governing body of the school is School Meeting, which is
comprised of all enrolled students and staff. Each member of School Meeting
(each individual student and staff member) is called a School Meeting Member,
or SMM. School Meeting convenes once a week to vote on decisions related to
running the school, such as rule changes, deletions, or additions, spending
proposals from the school budget, visitor approvals, and more. Every SMM has
one vote in every decision that we make (although most voting matters are not
mandatory), regardless of the type or magnitude of the decision - from what
supplies to stock the art room with to which staff we should hire.

Judicial Committee

While School Meeting creates and amends the rules and policies of the school
as needed, Judicial Committee (JC) enforces all the rules in our law book. JC
works in a similar way to jury duty; it is a rotating group of students and
staff that serve together on the committee for one week at a time. Serving on
JC is a requirement of all SMM’s, from the 5 year olds to the staff. JC meets
every day to handle cases, or “write ups.” A write up happens when any SMM
(child or adult) believes that another SMM (child or adult) has broken a rule
from the law book. When this happens, the plaintiff retrieves a write up form
and records the details of the incident. The case is usually heard the next
day in JC, which is run much like a small court - all testimony from both
sides is heard, evidence is presented, and JC makes two decisions by vote: was
a rule actually broken, and, if it was, what should be done about it? We call
these consequences “sentences,” and the range varies depending on the case and
the rule broken. Some examples of sentences might include a warning, having to
wipe down the lunchroom tables if a mess was left out, being banned from a
room or supply if it was used incorrectly.

School Assembly

There is a third governing body of the school called Assembly, which includes
all School Meeting Members (staff and students) as well as all the parents.
Assembly votes on decisions outside of the day to day running of the school,
such as tuition and staff salary. Assembly meets once a year in the spring to
approve the school budget and take care of any other needed business.

Clerkships

Much of the school’s day to day administrative needs are managed by clerks.
Clerks are elected officials within the school that are designated to handle
one particular duty. Some examples of clerkships are Admissions Clerk,
Attendance Clerk, PR Clerk, and Buildings and Grounds Clerk. Clerkships may be
held by students or staff and are elected yearly.

Corporations

Corporations are groups of School Meeting Members that are given authority
over a specific non-essential sphere of activity (e.g., cooking, electronics,
gymnastics, etc.) and generally have a budget approved by School Meeting. That
is to say, instead of being legislated by the entire school, the governance of
a corporation and its domain is done directly by those whom it concerns.

