OUR STORY
---

Arts & Ideas Sudbury School is a 21st-century school in Baltimore where
students ages 5 through 18 learn, explore, and grow in a stimulating,
supportive community.  The school is based on a philosophy of education first
pioneered by the Sudbury Valley School in 1968 and now operating in more than
40 schools worldwide. A&I was founded in 2008 by two parents, Danny Mydlack
and Caroline Chavasse, also professors, professional artists, and residents of
the Northeast neighborhood where Arts & Ideas began.  Before starting Arts &
Ideas, the founders formed a popular community playgroup for kids under age
five that was inspired by the principals of Sudbury schooling. Children, free
to follow their interests with minimal adult interference, were able to create
their own games and activities as they saw fit while navigating a rich social
scene--and PLAY! To learn more about the Sudbury model of education, Danny was
hired part-time for a year at the Fairhaven school, another Sudbury School in
Bowie, Maryland, and also shot the documentary, Voices From the New American
Schoolhouse, about the students at Fairhaven, while Caroline ran the
playgroup. After countless conversations with parents who said, “I don’t want
to homeschool...but there is not a school I know of that I like,”  the idea of
opening a school evolved into a concrete goal. Through visiting other Sudbury
Schools, continuing their research, and gaining hands-on experience, their
understanding of and commitment to the Sudbury model deepened just as the
up-and-coming vibe of their northeast neighborhood grew into a buzz. New
restaurants, coffee shops and a bookstore opened, attracting families from all
over Baltimore. It was a good time and place to open a school.  The school
first opened with nine students in the gracious upstairs hall of the Church of
the Messiah in the Hamilton/Lauraville neighborhood in Northeast Baltimore.
Almost entirely by word of mouth the school quickly grew, and in our second
year we opened with 40 students, at near capacity at our rented space.
Through the next five years, a search for a larger, more permanent home ran
concurrently as the school culture stabilized and matured. Parents, staff and
students defined a wish list for the school’s forever home, which included
remaining an urban school, with shops and city culture close by, while also
having an attractive green space; not an easy task to find an affordable place
to fit that bill in Baltimore.  Arts & Ideas made a move in its 6th year to
the neighborhood of Mt. Washington to occupy a vacant church space there.  The
challenges of the aging building and loss of the parking lot however, prompted
the community to reconsider staying there long term.  The model of democracy
which guides the day-to-day running of the school by students and staff (known
as School Meeting), expands to include parents (School Assembly) in the larger
financial decisions of the school, such as budget, tuition, and where to move.
We were at our most vulnerable in the summer of our sixth year, having decided
as a community to leave Mt. Washington, yet not having a sure next space to
move into. A couple of promising places fell through and just a couple of
weeks before school was scheduled to open, Arts & Ideas made a request to our
old friends at the Church of the Messiah to return, and they welcomed us back
without hesitation.  Though it was a harrowing time of temporary homelessness,
not one family left us, and in our 7th year, back at The Messiah, our
enrollment reached an all time high. Because of this dedication and commitment
of the Arts & Ideas community, and the concerns from not having a permanent
home, we turned our attention with sharp focus to making sure we would have
one going into our eighth year.  The community was energized and the Building
Search and Building Finance Committees were formed. We hired a consultant who
specialized in working with small, independent private schools, and adopted
his innovative plan for raising capital, while still maintaining our status of
having one of the lowest tuitions in Baltimore. After a year of hard work by
parents and staff, we were able to purchase a lovely, enhanced property on
Holder Avenue just a mile from our original home. This new space fit the bill!
Walking distance to Red Canoe, Zeke’s, Herring Run Park and other great shops
and stores, and over an acre of flat green space, just waiting for us to plant
and play and create. We moved in at the beginning of December, 2015--a large
group of us making the pilgrimage on foot from the old space to the new--and
quickly felt at home.  There's no other school quite like this in Baltimore!

## What’s with the name?  The founders (and namers of the school), have deep
backgrounds in the performing arts but choose the “arts” in the school’s name
to evoke a more meta meaning of the word. The arts have been fundamental to
humankind since we crawled out of the seas, and maybe even before then, who
knows. Arts is applied to the large and small spaces of our daily lives.
Beginning with the arts as being the child’s natural language, to the idea
that when someone is completely fluent in, and exquisitely executing almost
anything, we say they are practicing its art. A deep mastery of something is
engaging in its art form. “She was skilled in the art of negotiation.” People
who love unraveling numeric mysteries and finding order and structure in all
things are said to be practicing the art of mathematics.

Art is something one makes, creates, or re-purposes, and is, ideally, a unique
and original expression of its maker. The approach an artist has to life and
work--an openness, a playfulness, a diligence--can be applied across all
disciplines and aspects of living. “How can I make this project interesting to
me?” “What is a different way of looking at this problem?” “I don’t know the
outcome, but I will play within these circumstances anyway, and see what
happens.”

SIr Ken Robinson wrote of the arts as addressing the aesthetic experience
which he defined as “one in which your senses are operating at their peak;
when you’re resonating with the excitement of this things that you’re
experiencing; when you are fully alive.”  

When kids are given the time and space without judgment to pursue their
passions, one sees a child fully alive. It’s thrilling to witness.

And “ideas?”  Simply because, everyone has them; should feel ownership of
their own; should be able to fight like heck for their idea, but let it go
when a better one comes along, and because the world always needs good ones.

    - Caroline Chavasse, Co-Founder

