Our Staff
---

!caroline-blue.jpg,, staff tall

**Caroline Chavasse**  is the mother of two children and was a
Professor of Video Art at the Maryland Institute College of Art for 7 years.
She has presented master classes in Digital Video and Media Production at the
Gilman School and has taught theatre workshops at University of Michigan,
Middlebury College and Meredith College in Raleigh, NC. Caroline cofounded and
operated, along with some terrific parents, the Free School Preschool and a
community play group in Hamilton that ran for 5 years.  Before moving to
Baltimore in 2000, Caroline worked with LeVar Burton at his film company at
Paramount Studios in Los Angeles, helping to develop family-friendly
entertainment for television and film and also on his Emmy award-winning PBS
educational series, Reading Rainbow. Caroline has an extensive background in
theatre and television performing in New York City for ten years Off-Off
Broadway and regionally in Chicago, Milwaukee, Los Angeles, Richmond, North
Carolina and Vermont. She's enjoyed working with such luminaries as Phillip
Seymour Hoffman and Mary-Louise Parker. Her one-woman show, a blend of
monologue, comedy and dance, received critical acclaim and was developed into
a short independent film. Caroline has appeared in numerous television
commercials nationally and locally, as well as on "The Wire." Some of her
favorite things are history, vocabulary, cartooning, dog training,
choreography and dance, video making and editing, reading stories aloud,
camping and hiking, and working and playing with the exquisite young people at
Arts & Ideas.


!brooke-office.jpg,, staff

**Brooke Pazoles** is a recent graduate from the
University of Delaware, where she studied elementary and middle school
education. Even though she has a teacher’s certificate on paper, her
experience at UD was not like any other up and coming teacher’s. After
spending time in real classrooms during her early college career, Brooke soon
became aware of the atrocities taking place in public school systems today.
She almost dropped her major to pursue a totally different career, but was
steered to research Sudbury education by a professor who specialized in
alternative education models. Brooke was hooked immediately, and spent the
rest of her time at college pushing the University to support her in her quest
to complete her student teaching placement&mdash;and eventually become a full-time
staff member&mdash;at a Sudbury school. Brooke was able to fulfill her student
teaching requirement at The Philadelphia Free School, a Sudbury school in
South Philly. While at PFS, Brooke’s passion for Sudbury education blossomed
and grew. Her time as an intern there solidified her dream to pursue staffing
at a Sudbury school as her career. Brooke is originally from Bainbridge
Island, a tiny island off of Seattle. She spent most of her childhood outside,
building tree forts, picking blackberries, and getting intro trouble with her
cohort of neighborhood friends. Brooke enjoys biking and walking through
Baltimore's neighborhoods with her husband, writing, practicing yoga, and
snuggling with her three cats. She also cares deeply about community service
and giving her time and resources to those in need. She spent much of her time
at college volunteering for organizations like Habitat for Humanity, and spent
her final spring break rebuilding homes that were destroyed by hurricane
Katrina in New Orleans. Brooke is a type 1 diabetic and is an active member and
advocate within the worldwide diabetes community, spending much of her free
time mentoring others with the disease, scouring research papers, and
attending and speaking at diabetes conferences. 

!phil-sm.jpg,, staff boxy 

**Phil Glaser**  was born and raised in Olney, MD, a suburb of Washington
DC. His father, a public high school math teacher, and his mother, an IT
administrator at a major corporation, fostered his gravitation towards things
technical early on. His childhood fascination with technology and subsequent
public high school engineering education led him to attend the University of
Maryland school of engineering, where he immediately felt like he was missing
out. Having been exposed to a variety of places and ways of life through
travel as a young child and teenager, he also became aware of and interested
in the foreign and unknown. His curiosity led him to leave the fields of
engineering and computer science in favor of studying linguistics and Germanic
Studies, for which he earned his Bachelor's in 2011.  Phil's college decisions
provided him the opportunity to study abroad in Germany, which, in turn, led
him to pursue further travel opportunities. In search of a sustainable and
meaningful career after college, he spent two years living and working as a
homesteader in northern California and western North Carolina, and as an EFL
(English as a Foreign Language) teacher in Harbin, China. After teaching
English in China, he enrolled in a Master's of Education program (in ESOL) at
University of Maryland. During his time spent student-teaching and wrestling
with the realities of public schools, he discovered the Sudbury model and Arts
& Ideas in particular with the help of a couple of free-thinking professors.
Though he does not wish to teach in public schools, he is grateful to have
been in the Master's program, if only for the fact that he discovered
alternative models through it.  As staff at Arts & Ideas, Phil uses
his continued interest in computers and technology to help provide the tech
facilities required to keep up with the school community's ever-expanding
curiosity and imagination. He hopes to one day establish an exchange
program of some sort with other Sudbury schools, both American and
international.

!james-celery.jpg,, staff boxy

**James Taylor**  is a proud father, credentialed mathematician, heretical
physicist, and passionate (web) programmer. While he has had a life-long
dislike of traditional schooling, it was not until Arts & Ideas moved into his
backyard, sadly just for a year, that he first heard about the Sudbury model. 
He became an immediate
advocate for the school in the neighborhood and proceeded to learn more about
it. Having finally seen the solution as to how to let children live their life
with respect, he just had to join up.  James has a PhD in mathematics from
Rutgers University. His specialty is in the mathematics of quantum mechanics
on curved space. With over a decade of teaching mathematics, he has met many
students whose traditional mathematical education left them ignorant and
fearful of mathematics. For several years, James has had the very
rewarding experience, while teaching online for Johns Hopkins University, of
converting math phobic adults into math geeks. He has done this by encouraging his
students to explore their life using mathematics, asking and answering their
own relevant questions.  In his time at A&amp;I, his experiences have confirmed
that children are amazing human beings and are a much under-appreciated gift
to the human race. He is honored to be a part of this community and learns a
great deal about the possibilities of life every day. 

---
article p {
    margin-bottom: 3rem;
}

figure.staff.boxy {
    width:40%;
}

figure.staff.tall {
    width:23%;
}
