I get it, but what about ...
---

Also see http://sudburyschoolofatlanta.org/ssa-education/questions/ which 
inspired some of the below text. 

...reading? 

Children learn to read in a variety of ways at their own timing. Some learn at
age 4 and others learn when they are 9. When they learn, they learn quickly.
By letting them find their own way, their joy of reading is undiminished.

Reading is a basic skill of our society and children are highly motivated to
acquire that skill as it is such a basic part of everyone's daily needs.

[A Thousand Rivers](http://schoolingtheworld.org/a-thousand-rivers/) is an
excellent article on gaining a proper perspective on children learning to read
on their own. Of particular note is the claim that late readers are not
distinguishable from early readers within a couple of years of common reading
ability.


...math?

Much like reading, basic arithmetic is a useful skill that children pick up as
they need it. They use numbers in daily life, such as dealing with money,
dividing up stuff, etc, and they get a natural feeling for their use.

The more advanced mathematics is not picked up naturally, but they are easily
learned when there is need. There is ample evidence of this in the history of
Sudbury schools. For example, college entrance tests require some mathematical
knowledge which Sudbury students pick up in a few months of dedicated effort.

Our model also has the additional feature that none of our students learn to
fear or hate mathematics. Instead, they see it as a tool that they can master
just as they can master any skill that they need.


...getting into college?

The admissions process of colleges varies and student experience will vary as
well, but the experience to date is that students who wish to go to college do
not have problems. If there are tests that need taking, they prepare for them.
If there are prerequisites that they can fill, they do so. If not, they talk
their way around them.

As with most roles in society, being accepted is more a matter of personality
and clarity of thought rather than a simple list of skills. Our students can
easily talk with adults. They have a focus and clearness derived from years of
negotiating a complex and ever-changing society. This sells well to those in
admissions. 

Once admitted, they also do not seem to have problems with the courses. While
they may have never taken a course before, they are well-equipped to learn
what they need to learn in order to succeed at college. They can easily talk
with professors and resource centers. They work hard at it as they know why
they are there.

They are also not distracted by the social scene at college. They have have
had many years of socializing and that is not the novelty of college for them.
For Sudbury students, college is a place to learn academic material that they
believe will be of use to them in their chosen path in life. Thus, they work
hard.

Much of our experience is derived from the stories of the 40+ year old Sudbury Valley School. They have reported that over 80% of their graduates get into the college of their first choice. And the others go directly into the career of their choice. 

As for us, of our two graduates thus far, one is studying photography at the college of his choice - which he was accepted to without a diploma or SAT’s, and the other is a professional pastry chef at a restaurant - his dream job that he apprenticed for while attending A&I. 


...accreditation?

We are a licensed and recognized school in Maryland. Our standing suffices
to meet the obligatory attendance requirement for school.

We are not accredited. To be accredited, we would need to follow a
standardized curriculum which is antithetical to our model.

Accreditation may matter for certain goals, such as playing in collegiate
athletics. Even here, however, there may be options such as participating
in an online accredited school.    

 



    ...screen time?
It is quite possible that your child will spend all day on the computer at times - and that’s okay! With all of the negative media attention surrounding screen time, it is not surprising that many parents are concerned about this. We at Arts & Ideas recognize that computers are the most important tools of modern society and that there are many proven, studied advantages to playing with them regularly. Furthermore, computers and gaming are very social activities at our school in which students engage with each other, learn from each other, and problem-solve together. We also find that with everything going on at our school, it is nearly impossible for any one child to do only one thing, all day, every day, forever. We see even the screen-obsessed kids (the ones learning to code a new Minecraft mod, or spending hours working on a tiny animation detail of a new video), take breaks to challenge themselves to go out of their comfort zone by climbing a tree or playing a game of soccer. When kids feel comfortable in their safe space - whether that be near a screen or not - they gain the confidence in themselves and bravery to try something new. 



* How do students know what they don’t know?

“When you teach a child something you take away forever his chance of discovering it for himself.” ~ Jean Piaget

We live in the information age, where knowledge is available at your fingertips. In the world we live in, and especially at a Sudbury school where conversation flows freely and without time limits, it would be an enormously difficult task not to be exposed to all kinds of topics and information. Because students are free to explore and interact with other students and adults of all ages with all different backgrounds, they are naturally exposed to a wide variety of topics. Students follow their curiosity and interest, which isn’t limited to a set curriculum. Have you ever met a young child that doesn’t like asking questions? At A&I, this curiosity isn’t squashed when the child enrolls at school - instead it is encouraged and allowed to blossom into all kinds of information exploring and gathering. 
* Outside supplements?

“Just as eating against one’s will is injurious to health, so studying without a liking for it spoils the memory, and it retains nothing it takes in.” ~ Leonardo da Vinci

Some people immediately see the social value of our school and think they can fill the perceived academic void by having their child follow an online curriculum at home, by visiting a weekly tutor, or by engaging in nightly homeschool esque lessons with the parent. These kinds of activities are fine, if and only if it is truly your child’s choice to engage in them. However, any type of academics or extra-curricular activity that is forced upon your child is contrary to our school’s philosophy and will undermine their experience at school. It sends a mixed-message to your child that school is for playing and the “real” learning takes place at home. This not only adversely affects your child but the entire school community, because the idea of school being a place where learning doesn’t happen starts to spread. It is the job of the parent to support their child at a Sudbury school by consistently delivering the message that what the child chooses to engage in at school is important, valuable, “real learning,” and enough - simply because it is what they’ve chosen to engage in. 


## Adults

* What do the teachers teach?

We have no teachers. The adults employed by the school are staff. They may teach students something just as adults might teach each other something on occasion. But their primary role is not to be teachers. And more often than not, the staff get to be learners. Children are so curious.

* What do staff do?

Anything and everything. Often, they seem to mainly be there to be interrupted. The staff do what needs to be done to make sure the school keeps running, is safe, is supportive of student needs, and answer many questions.

“What I have learned, very slowly and painfully over the years, is that children make vital decisions for themselves in ways that no adults could have anticipated or even imagined.” ~ Hanna Greenberg, founder of Sudbury Valley School, in The Art of Doing Nothing
Although we practice non-interference as much as possible, staff are always available to help students if and when they ask. Staff are also responsible for the administrative and operational functions of the school, however students may be elected to clerkships to help with this process.

* adult guidance?

* supplements?

* special needs?

Case-by-case basis. They need to be able to be independent, safely so, handle their own needs, not need an adult caretaker, etc.  They must be able to

* conflicts?

* discipline?

* Lord of the Flies?

* success?




## Adults

##### What do the teachers teach?

We have no teachers. The adults employed by the school are staff. They may
teach students something just as adults might teach each other something on
occasion. But their primary role is not to be teachers. And more often than
not, the staff get to be learners. Children are so curious.



![h](img/jt-trash-elf.jpg)

* What do staff do?

Anything and everything. Often, they seem to mainly be there to be
interrupted. The staff do what needs to be done to make sure the school keeps
running, is safe, is supportive of student needs, and answer many questions.

*  Staff student ratio

* Backgrounds of staff?

See the bios, diverse backgrounds (no teacher certification)

_Another good 

    ...graduation?

Picture of library

* reading? 



![Math in action](img/selling.jpg)

* math? 

* college? 


* accreditation?

![Computer pointing](img/computer-pointing.jpg)

* screen time? 



![Social Gaming](img/group-computer.jpg)

* adult guidance? 

* supplements?

* special needs?

Case-by-case basis. They need to be able to be independent, safely so, handle their own needs, not need an adult caretaker, etc.  They must be able to

* conflicts?

* discipline?

* Lord of the Flies?

* success?
