## Safety

Keeping children safe is the number one goal of any parent. It is our belief
that our school is the safest school when we view the whole needs of a child.

There are different ways to think about safety. Typical safety focuses on
"bubble wrap" safety. That is, the environment is locked down tightly to
prevent children from hurting themselves or others. This sounds great in
theory except such physical safety not only often involves and promotes
emotional harm, but in the long run it can raise the probabilities of physical
harm because children need to have the freedom to endanger themselves in order
to 

Our school is a safe place. This is not something that is apparent to most
casual observers. 

Most people see children not being supervised by adults and think that it is a
dangerous chaos that will surely end in disaster. 

But what they fail to see is that the vast majority of children, just as any
living creature, want to minimize harm to themselves and the ones they care
about. That last bit is crucial. 

What we find here is that our students have strong buy-in to the community.
They care about one another. They watch out for one another. Whenever a
student has any of the many of bumps and scrapes of childhood, another
student will go get our medical clerk. 

In other schools, students tend to compete with and even fear other students.
A large part of adult supervision is in making sure they do not hurt each
other. 

The situation at Arts&Ideas is dramatically different. Students care for one
another just as members of an extended family would. They have sibling-style
fights, to be sure, but we have none of the physically brutal nor emotional
cruelty common in other schools. Adult intervention is unnecessary. 

Instead of adults being this limited resource trying to protect kids from
kids, the staff of Arts&Ideas is a plentiful resource to help those who
legitimately seek our help. We ensure that the school is safe from external
threats and model compassion and care for all of our students.

Instead of one pair of eyes trying to watch 30 kids, we have 30 pairs of eyes
watching 30 kids. And those eyes are filled with care and compassion, not
fear. 

Such is the power of social safety of our school.
